Religion & Ethics  
Why should we act in the interest of anyone but ourselves? In Thomas More’s *Utopia*, he proposes a comprehensive model for a perfect society, where he also implies that any aspects of his *Utopia* that are missing are parts that should not be present in a perfect society. *Utopia* was a major inspiration for the literary genre of dystopian fiction, where seemingly perfect societies have deep flaws within them. He talks about how in Utopia, society is largely egalitarian, meaning rights and responsibilities are shared across social classes. Utopian society has eliminated poverty, and most forms of human suffering have been greatly reduced. More also claims that in his perfect society, people must be religious to keep themselves from straying into amorality and living hedonistically. Looking at real-world religions and atheists, we can see that the relationship between religion and morality is more nuanced than More puts it; morality and religion are not always dependent on each other.  
The Utopian, and indirectly More’s, main claim about religion and the conclusion reached from the reasoning that is used to rationalize participation in it, is wrong. According to the Utopians, "...any fool could tell you what you ought to do" if one didn't accept the religious principles of immortality and divine judgment. They argue that without these principles, individuals would prioritize their own pleasure above all else, without concern for right and wrong. As More states, individuals would simply "...go all out for your own pleasure, irrespective of right and wrong," (More) demonstrating the Utopians' perspective on morality without faith. This line of thinking overlooks the significance of human agency and accountability. By handing over the arbitration of morality to a divine being's judgment after death, individuals are stripped of their ability to make moral decisions in the present. Even if you were to assume this deity exists, relinquishing moral responsibility to them reduces the role of humans in creating a moral society. Also, this reliance on the divine can lead to moral complacency within the community, as individuals may become unconcerned with ethical behavior when they are not held accountable for their actions in this life.  
There are also examples of how, even if religion is adhered to, morality does not follow. Salman Rushdie is an author whose work, *The Satanic Verses,* sparked a lot of controversy in the Shia Muslim community. In certain parts of the book, there are references made to specific verses of the Al-Qur’an that are not considered canon. In it, the prophet Muhammed mistakes a dialogue by Satan, also called *Gharaniq*, or the Satanic Verses, for divine revelation. Rushdie’s inclusion of this topic in his book caused a rift between him and a few religious leaders in Shia Islam, as they considered it blasphemy to reference the *Gharaniq*. Rushdie is also currently the subject of a *fatwa*, an irrevocable decree in Shia Islam, which was issued because of this book. The *fatwa* orders any Muslims he encounters to kill him on sight. Rushdie has had to live in hiding and in police protection until recently, as multiple attempts have been made on his life, some of which have been near-successful. He now lives in Manhattan and makes public appearances. The problem here lies in Rushdie’s work of fiction leading him to be targeted and harassed. Religion, as prescribed in *Utopia*, is supposed to be a way of keeping people in good moral standing, but in real-world cases, it is shown that it can instead be used in a darker way, it can be used to cause harm to people by misusing the power afforded to the upper echelons of these faiths.  
Also, More asserts that in the absence of a religious framework, without using doctrine to keep people in check, that people act purely in their self interest. He writes: “For what's the sense of struggling to be virtuous, \[of\] denying yourself the pleasant things of life, and deliberately making yourself uncomfortable, if there's nothing you hope to gain by it? And what can you hope to gain by it, if you receive no compensation after death for a thoroughly unpleasant, that is, a thoroughly miserable life?” (More). This line of thinking, that people live without a care for morality in the absence of a god that watches over your actions is both pessimistic and incorrect. Even if we assume that people act entirely in their own interest in the absence of religion, there are several reasons why they might not act purely in self-serving ways. For example, they might seek personal growth or want to work to better themselves. And if they don’t simply act selfishly, contributing to their communities can give people purpose, and they would also be making the communities they are involved in better. People can also still have principles in the absence of religion. There are many charitable organizations that are secular, and others that were founded specifically on atheist values and still do good for people. A few examples include the Atheist Republic, an international community originally founded in Iran. It helps safeguard women’s rights, and also lobbies against atheist persecution around the globe. Another is the Center for Inquiry, a nonprofit that is backed by Richard Dawkins which works to maintain the separation of church and state. The last example that I will use is Médecins Sans Frontières, or Doctors without Borders, a charity that sends medical professionals to active combat zones and nations with epidemics to give people medical help. What the existence of these organizations created for altruistic ends means is that people have an ingrained want to help each other, and this need exists independently from religion.  
More's *Utopia* beautifully paints a vision of a perfect society, in which religious doctrines play a central role in promoting morality. Still, it is essential to realize the limits and potential pitfalls of such a system. While religion can offer guidance and moral frameworks for many people, it also has the ability to cause harm. Blindly following dogmatic beliefs can stifle the exploration of alternative perspectives and prevent people from being able to express themselves. Rather than nurturing ethical living, the rigid religious beliefs depicted in *Utopia* can perpetuate violence and free expression, as individuals may be discouraged from questioning or challenging established doctrines. In a society that values critical inquiry and intellectual curiosity, it is key to recognize the value in diverse perspectives and open dialogue, free from the constraints of religious pressure.  
While More uses reasoning that is intuitive and seems rational on the surface level to provide practical use for faith. The logic that his Utopians use is flawed because it does not reflect how real people can find the ability to work together. Understanding how people can act in the common good and why they do so is useful because it can help us understand each other better. Exploring nonreligious frameworks for ethical behavior and societal organization is key in addressing the challenges we face in today’s society, especially in the modern age where it is increasingly more common to find religious beliefs that differ from our own. Finding moral common ground independent of religion can be advantageous in our interactions with people from different backgrounds.