---
layout: post
title:  "Overcoming Egotism"
date:   2024-01-01 23:51:09 -0700
categories: Humanities
---
  
What do you think about how you engage with people? All of us have biases, some that we are aware of, and others that we are not. In my experience, our interactions with the people in our communities are influenced by these biases, and it is remarkably easy to fall into the trap of judging people before we even say a word to them. As a result of this, individuals often alienate themselves from their own communities before they can even have a chance to truly become part of them. My experience as a second generation immigrant is why I strongly believe that distancing ourselves from others based on our biases only serves to harm us, and that it's always better to interact with people while ignoring your prejudices.  
When I moved back to the United States from India a couple of years ago, I came in with a few negative stereotypes of the community I moved to. The popular culture in most of the places I had been, my social circle and especially my family, had led me to believe that Americans were, among other things, self-centered, arrogant and not very smart in general. It is very likely that it will seem obvious to you that these biases I speak of were harmful and untrue. At the time however, I had not realized how entrenched my subconscious biases had become. I am ashamed to say that these prejudices had become part of my personality. These misguided beliefs made me think of myself as much smarter and more motivated than the people in my community, and made me withdrawn and snobbish. My reluctance to engage with my community led me to become isolated, and I found it difficult to get along with people.  During this time, feelings of loneliness, frustration and anxiety caused me to struggle in academic life.  
In my first few weeks here, I felt like I was out of my element. There were so many parts of this new culture and environment that I didn’t understand. The stereotypes that I had accepted as fact compounded this feeling that I was an outsider and that I did not belong. Afraid of not being accepted, I gradually pulled myself away from situations where I might have disillusioned myself of these ideas.  
What finally cured me of this mentality was a conversation I had with an elderly man that I bumped into on the streets of Los Angeles. After the initial shock of running into each other, instead of him being annoyed or brusque, he smiled at me and started up a conversation. He invited me to attend a community event that day. I thought that it would be rude to decline, and so I went and discovered a welcoming and multifaceted community. I was given several pieces of helpful advice, and the experience shook the foundations of the prejudices I had held.  
I had no idea that people could be so nice and forthcoming with someone that they didn’t even know. Talking with someone and being placed in an environment where my perspective was gradually challenged was an eye-opening experience. I did not expect that relative strangers would generously put in so much effort to help me. This experience made me confront the biases I had become aware of, and now, I am continuing to work on eliminating my biases and treating people the same way regardless of any prejudices I may have. I’d like to think I’ve come a long way in being a less prejudiced person, but I’m sure I still have weak points there.  
Many people who move to new communities have similar experiences to me. When many people first move, a fear of not being accepted keeps them from taking the first steps toward integrating themselves into the communities around them. A lack of understanding of the culture of a nation you move to could lead to you having friction with people of your community. The importance of being able to look past your own ingrained biases cannot be overstated. If people took steps to better understand the communities that they want to be part of, they may find that it helps them in the long run by making the integration into the new community easier and exposing them to novel perspectives.  
My experience in relocating to the United States has shown me a few key truths about communities at large. Before I moved here, I held prejudices borne from a feeling of displacement from where I felt I should be. After moving, I learnt that the important part of dealing with a major change in your community is to keep an open mind and to be willing to change. Moving to an unfamiliar environment is an experience that many of us will undergo. Even if you won’t be moving to a new environment, some self-reflection on how and why you treat people the way you do could go a long way in making you a better member of your community. If we could focus less on the conclusions we draw in our own heads, and more on the truth in people’s actions, we could make the world a better place.
